===== SEMESTER 1: Factual Description =====

 Chapter-3                            Factual Description
Factual description is a formal piece of writing often used in writing biographies, describing objects, places,
ideas or events. As the name suggests, a factual description is a systematic description of facts about a person,
object, place or event. The writer describes the facts in detail covering various aspects of the person or the thing
being described so as to enable the reader to get a comprehensive idea about the subject being described. A factual
description is generally written in the form of paragraph.
                        Important Aspects of Factual Description
   Æ   Objective description of the facts
   Æ   Realistic and vivid description
   Æ   Comprehensive description (covering various aspects)
   Æ   Systematic description: One aspect at a time (For example: If you are describing the physical
       features of the object, you must not switch to its internal value)
   Æ   Formal, correct language, no use of slangs
   Æ   Variety in the use of vocabulary
   Æ   No repetition
   Æ   The length of factual description may vary depending on the purpose. For examination purpose, the
       length of a factual description will be limited, 80-100 words.

                                           Describing People
While describing people the following points are considered important.
  Æ     Physical traits:
  Æ     Personality trait
  Æ     Occupation/Profession
  Æ     Routines/habits
  Æ     Hobbies
  Æ     Philosophy of life
  Æ     Other people's opinion about the person

Physical Traits: age, height, body, structure, face, complexion, eyes, eyebrows, nose, lips, hair colour and type,
clothes, etc.
Behaviour/Personality Trait: active, ambitious, creative, curious, talkative, out spoken, soft spoken, polite,
rude, loving, caring, affectionate, kind, compassionate, strict, humble, proud, introvert, extrovert, shy,
narrow/open-minded, amiable, friendly, weird, understanding, humorous, jovial, fun-loving etc.
Hobbies: singing, dancing, reading, surﬁng on net, painting, gardening, playing cricket/football/hockey etc.

                  Describing People : Sample : My Favourite Teacher
Mr. Sharma is my favourite teacher in the school. He teaches us science. He is a tall, handsome and well-built
man. He is 40 years old. He is always smartly and formally dressed. He is very well-behaved, soft-spoken and
polite. He is kind and compassionate. Sometimes he also cracks witty jokes. He explains the concepts very well.
He is fond of reading books and playing golf. Everyone in the school appreciates and likes him. I really admire
him a lot. May he live long!

                                                        36
                               Marking Scheme :          Total Marks 5
                               Format                  : 1 Mark (Introduction, Description, Conclusion)
                               Content                 : 2 Marks
                               Language &
                               Expression              : 2 Marks

1. Describe your uncle/father/grandfather in 80-100 words.




                                                  37
2. Describe your best friend in about 80-100 words.




                                                      38
3. Describe a celebrity you like the most in about 80-100 words.




                                                     39
                                              Describing Objects

While describing objects the following points are considered important.
  Æ     The name of the object
  Æ     Model/year of manufacture
  Æ     Brand/Company
  Æ     Guarantee/warranty
  Æ     Shape/structure
  Æ     Colour and material
  Æ     Contents/parts
  Æ     Sizes available/dimension
  Æ     Utility/capacity/functions/operational details
  Æ     Availability
  Æ     Price
  Æ     Your remarks about the object/product
  Æ     Your experience with the object/product

                               Describing Objects: Sample: Kindle




I have recently purchased a Kindle. Kindle is a small hand-held electronic device for reading books, which has
been developed by online retailer Amazon. It is the latest model, Paper White, which has a high contrast touch
screen which allows me to read even in bright sunshine with no glare. The device is extremely light weight and
portable. I buy books as Kindle versions of ‘e-books’ from the Amazon website. In addition, I can also download
PDFs of any sort of document, which makes this an ideal way of reading for work and study. It has a six-inch
screen to read from and a small key board. It has built-in wiﬁ and 3G connection to download books on to it. I can
adjust the text size in it. It has battery life of at least a month if wiﬁ is turned off. It also has a page-turning function
to get the feel of reading a real book. It can store up to 1400 books. The books can be categorised or stored as
collections. I can also add my own annotations to the text. It has also got a built-in Oxford English Dictionary. It
also has the feature of password protection. Kindle has made my reading experience much more joyful and
beneﬁcial. I love it.

                                                            40
1. You have purchased a new laptop. Describe it including all its features.




                                                     41
2. Describe your wrist watch in not more than 100 words.




                                                   42


===== SEMESTER 2: Factual Description =====

 Chapter-3                             Factual Description
Factual description is a formal piece of writing often used in writing biographies, describing objects, places,
ideas or events. As the name suggests, a factual description is a systematic description of facts about a person,
object, place or event. The writer describes the facts in detail covering various aspects of the person or the thing
being described so as to enable the reader to get a comprehensive idea about the subject being described. A factual
description is generally written in the form of paragraph.

                                       Describing Places
While describing places the following points are considered important.
 Æ Name of the place
 Æ Its location
 Æ Dimension/area
 Æ Surrounding
 Æ Detailed description in terms of structure, entrance, exit, boundary, walls, height, length, breadth,
       paintings, ﬂooring, furnishing, ventilation, light, capacity etc.
 Æ Importance

                Describing Places: Sample: My School Library




My school library is a well set-up library. It is a very big library on the ground ﬂoor of the school. It consists of
several book stands and cabinets. Books are arranged according to categories in these book stands and cabinets. It
has a wide range of books on diverse subjects, story books, comic books, subject books, reference books,
journals, encyclopedia, biographies and magazines. At the entrance there is the librarian’s desk. There are rows of
tables and chairs in the center of the library for students to sit. Another section is the reference section of the
library house for teachers. All the students visit library as per their classroom visit schedule. Library cards are to
be carried while visiting library. Our librarian is very helpful in locating and selecting books as per our needs. We
are allowed to borrow one book at a time and the records for the same are maintained by the librarian. We need to
ensure that the books are not damaged by us and are returned on time.
                                                         36
                                Marking Scheme :        Total Marks 5
                                Format                : 1 Mark (Introduction, Description, Conclusion)
                                Content               : 2 Marks
                                Language &
                                Expression            : 2 Marks

1. Describe a historical monument you have recently visited.




                                                   37
2. Describe your city in about 80-100 words.




                                               38
                                          Describing Events
While describing events the following points are considered important.
  Æ Name of the event
  Æ Date, time, venue
  Æ Purpose/Theme
  Æ Organisers
  Æ Mode of entry or Conditions for entry
  Æ Chief guests/ participants/ people who conducted the event
  Æ Inauguration
  Æ What happened in the event
  Æ Prizes/awards/recognitions/honours
  Æ Audience's opinion about the event

                   Describing Events: Sample: The Earth Day




The Earth Day is an annual event celebrated on April 22. Worldwide, various events are held to demonstrate
support for environmental protection. This year Earth Day was celebrated in my school with great pomp and
show. The day began with the morning assembly where one student talked at length about the importance of
celebrating this day. Another student recited a poem on the importance of saving natural resources. Our worthy
Principal also addressed the students and shared her views on the importance of saving trees and forests. The day
continued with some competitions such as Poem Recitation Competition, Poster Making Competition, and
Essay Writing Competition etc. We also planted saplings in the school premises. The winners of various
competitions were given attractive prizes and certiﬁcates. The event taught us about the importance of saving the
blue planet in all its varied manifestations.


                                                       39
3. Your school has recently organised a musical event “Conﬂuence”. Describe the event.




                                                   40
4. Describe the Annual Function held in your school.




                                                   41
5. Describe Parents Teacher Meet held recently in your school.




                                                   42
