 Chapter-6                                   Article Writing
An article is a piece of prose writing published in a newspaper, magazines, newsletters or journals, or written in a
blog to express the author's personal views regarding a topic of public interest or containing the ﬁndings of the
research conducted by the author on a relevant topic. It requires a lot of reading and research on part of the author
to write an effective article on a topic. One can gather various ideas from books, newspaper, magazines, research
reports, internet,
                                         Constituents of an Article
    1. Title/Heading: The title of the article should be relevant to the topic. It may consist of one word, phrase
         or even a small sentence. It should be catchy and effective enough to arouse the interest of the audience. It
         should also introduce the theme, purpose or the main idea of the article.
    2.   By-Line: Name of the author: It contains the author's name. It is written just below the title. It may also
         include the date if the article has been published.
   3.    Introduction/Opening: The ﬁrst paragraph is the introduction of the topic, theme or the subject matter
         on which the article is written. It may begin with a famous, relevant quote, some verses from a poem, a
         question, an exciting piece of information related to the topic or results of a survey.
   4.    Development of the Topic: This is the main body of the article. The topic is developed covering various
         aspects of the theme. It is usually written in three to four well organised and well connected paragraphs
         with a clear theme sentence and supporting sentence for each paragraph. The development may cover
         both positive and negative aspects of the topic depending on the theme.
   5.    Winding up: The second last paragraph usually summarizes all the ideas discussed in the article or winds
         up the discussion.
   6.    Conclusion: The last paragraph concludes the author's views regarding the topic and includes
         suggestions or required steps to be taken depending on the topic discussed in the article.
                              Writing Article – The Writing Process
    1. Reading: Read the question carefully to understand the topic on which the article is to be written.
    2. Collection of Ideas: Make a list of the main ideas and the supporting facts, opinions or data considering
         all the aspects of the topic.
    3. Organisation of Ideas: Arrange the ideas in a logical sequence keeping in mind the constituents of the
         article and cause-effect-remedy sequence of the topic.
    4. Rough draft: Make a rough draft including the title, opening sentences, relevant points to develop the
         topic, conclusion. Keep the target audience and purpose of writing the article in mind while making the
         rough draft.
   5.    Language: Use appropriate vocabulary and correct, formal language and an impressive tone. Avoid
         using slangs or excessively idiomatic expressions. Use simple, communicative and effective language.
         Add quotations if possible.
   6.    Use of Paragraphs: Don't write the sentences in a haphazard manner. Use well organised paragraphs to
         develop the topic with theme sentence and supporting sentences for each paragraph. Discuss only one
         aspect of the topic in one paragraph.
   7.    Organisation: Use appropriate cohesive devices to connect the thoughts expressed in a paragraph or to
         connect different paragraphs in a logical sequence. Keep in mind the cause-effect-remedy sequence
         while developing the idea.
   8.    Editing: Correct the spellings, grammatical errors or errors in punctuation.
   9.    Revision and Final Draft: Revise the whole draft and make necessary changes if required. Prepare the
         ﬁnal draft.



                                                          60
Remember the Acronym CODER: Collection, Organisation, Draft, Editing, Revision


                                          Collect the
                                            Ideas



                   Revise and                                 Organise the
                    make the                                     Ideas
                   Final Draft




                                                          Make a
                               Edit
                                                        Rough Draft


                            Writing Article – Sample 1




                                               61
                                                   Child Labour
                                               By: Kalpana Srivastava
     “There can be no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way in which it treats its children.”
                                                                                           – Nelson Mandela

Children are future citizens of the Nation, and their adequate development is utmost priority of the country.
Unfortunately, child labour engulfs children across the world. There are an estimated 186 million child labourers
worldwide. Although the Constitution of India guarantees free and compulsory education to children between
the age of 6 to 14 and prohibits employment of children younger than 14 in 18 hazardous occupations, child
labour is still prevalent in Indian economy.

Children are employed in both formal and informal sectors. Among the occupations wherein children are
engaged in work are construction work, domestic work and small-scale industries. Indian children are working in
different industries, and incidentally maximum are in agricultural sector, leather industry, mining and match-
making industries etc. Some of the industries that depend on child labourers are bangle-making, beedi-making,
power looms and manufacturing processes. These industries use toxic metals and substances such as lead,
mercury, manganese, chromium, cadmium, benzene, pesticides and asbestos. Child labour is very harmful and
wholehearted efforts to eliminate this should be done.

Poverty is considered as one of the contributory factors in child labour. Children who are drawn to child labour
are basically driven because of economic deprivation, lack of schooling and engagement of family for daily
needs. The reason why children are preferred as labourers is that they are obedient with very low demands. They
are not aware of labour acts and their rights. They can be easily exploited by getting maximum work for minimum
wages.

The ill effects of child labour on the physical, mental and psychological health of a child are innumerable. There
is a high prevalence of respiratory problems, migraines, insomnia, irritability, enuresis and asthenia, skin lesions,
ear complaints, light-headedness, fatigue, impaired memory and depression amongst child labourers.

In India, the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act 1986 and Rules state that no child shall be employed
or permitted to work in any of the occupations set forth in Part A of the Schedule or in any workshop wherein any
of the processes set forth in Part B of the Schedule is carried on. For this purpose, “child” means a person who has
not completed his 14th year of age. The Act prohibits employment of children in certain speciﬁed hazardous
occupations and processes and regulates the working conditions in others. The list of hazardous occupations and
processes is progressively being expanded on the recommendation of the Child Labour Technical Advisory
Committee constituted under the Act. Education is a very important part of development. Schools are the
platform for early intervention against child labour, as it restricts their participation in menial jobs.

Poverty is one of the important factors for this problem. Hence, enforcement alone cannot help solve it. The
Government has been laying a lot of emphasis on the rehabilitation of these children and on improving the
economic conditions of their families.

Child labour can be stopped when knowledge is translated into legislation and action, moving good intention and
ideas into protecting the health of the children.


                                                         62
                                   Writing Article – Sample 2
                                        Growing Tuition Culture in India
                                            By: Ramandeep Kaur
Growing tuition culture is a great concern in the modern India. There was a time when only those students were
recommended a private tuition who were not good at studies and found it difﬁcult to keep pace with the normal
classroom studies. Tuition culture in India now seems inseparable from the normal schools. Hence, education
today is not the transmission of knowledge, but has become a very successful trade.

Commonly we relate growth of tuition system in India with the ever increasing competition. As the competition
is increasing, students do not want to leave any stone unturned. Apart from this, seeing other students going for
tuition, parents also force their kids for the same, whether they need this or not. In schools, especially the ones in
remote villages, there is a shortage of teachers, thus students are left with no option but to go for tuition, if their
parents can afford it.

Be it any need, the tuition system is India is a great set back to the entire education system as well as schooling.
Students are greatly dependent upon tuition for studies, so much that even nursery kids go for the same, let alone
students preparing for competitive exams.

One of the reasons why tuition business in India has gained so much importance is teachers’ lack of concern as,
they do not teach well at schools. Also such teachers ask their students to get private tuition from them after
school hours. But if the teachers cannot make their students understand the subject at school, how can they make
everything clear during tuition? Only because the tuition fee completely belongs to them, they put extra efforts.
Though every teacher is not like this, but majority now belongs to this category. Although there are some teachers
who are willing to help students at any time and are against tuition. They promote self study and also guide well in
school or college classes, the number of such teachers is diminishing in India.

Modern version of tuition centre is the coaching centres and some of these are so popular that these even have
branches all across India. These so called tuition centres or coaching centres take full advantage of today’s
competition and quickly make money. Almost all candidates who clear Civil Services exams or other competitive
exams take private tuition. Students from marginalized groups are also given scholarships for the tuition.

By seeing the mushrooming of so called tuition centres, especially run by government school and college
teachers, the government has also passed directions that government teachers teaching at schools or colleges
cannot take private tuition and if they continue to do so it is illegal and harsh steps will be taken against the guilty.
But it is very difﬁcult to uproot this problem in India as we no longer consider tuition a problem, but part of
schooling and education. Also it is widespread and well accepted. One of the major setbacks of tuition system in
India is the decline in quality of education at schools as both parents and teachers rely more on tuition studies than
school. Also every parent cannot afford this as tuition are no longer free and some charge very high rates. So here
again the quality depends upon the money you are willing to pay. Poor people are actually seen curbing their basic
needs to send their kids for tuition.

So if we really want to change the whole situation we have to change ourselves. If possible and if they are capable,
parents should devote time to their kids and help them in studies. Whenever required, students can take the
guidance of school teachers. Also laws should be made for tuition and should be enforced with strictness.


                                                          63
1. Write an article on the topic “Importance of Co-curricular Activities” in the life of a student. You may
ﬁnd the following hints useful.
      Hints: Deﬁne Co-curricular activities, enlist their effect on the all round development of child:
      physical, mental, social, psychological and ethical, add some examples of co-curricular activities,
      explain parents’, teachers’ and schools’ roles




                                                    64
2. Write an article on the topic “Increasing Use of Social Sites by Students”, covering its advantages and
disadvantages. You may ﬁnd the following hints useful.
     Hints: Quick sharing of pictures, videos, and other information, updated knowledge, healthy social
     relationships, entertainment, connecting people worldwide, video chat, snap chat, wastage of time,
     distraction, leakage of private information, objectionable content




                                                   65
3. Write an article on the topic “Effective Study Habits” covering all the important do’s and don’ts. You
may ﬁnd the following hints useful.
     Hints: Early to bed and early to rise, regularity, punctuality, healthy life style, making notes, visiting
     library, reference books, remaining updated, participation in all school activities, sharing information,
     removing doubts at an early stage, self study and regular revision, avoid wasting time, no cramming, no
     junk food, no laziness




                                                     66
4. Write an article on the topic “Importance of Reading” enlisting its positive effects on cognitive,
psychological and social and moral development of a child. You may ﬁnd the following hints useful.
     Hints: Knowledge, exposure, pleasure, cognitive, psychological, social and moral development, great
     pastime, emotional well being, concentration, good for research, types of reading, types of books etc.




                                                    67
5. Write an article on the topic “Use of Smart Boards and Educational Software” covering its advantages
and challenges. You may ﬁnd the following hints useful.
     Hints: Interactive, entertaining, multi-sensory approach, attractive, better attention, better retention,
     visual effects, exercises, work-sheets, question banks, time consuming, tech-savvy, dependent on
     electricity and internet, technical issues, requires updating, costly




                                                     68
6. Write an article on the topic “Fast Food, Slow Health” enlisting major causes, concerns and effects and
offering alternatives. You may ﬁnd the following hints useful.
      Hints: Easy and quick to make, colourful, attractive, variety, artiﬁcially ﬂavoured, excessive use of
      sugar, artiﬁcial ingredients, stored or canned, limited or no nutritional value, obesity, poor mental health,
      addiction, ill effects on health




                                                        69
