 Chapter-6                                      Short Stories
Since times immemorial, stories have tempted people of all ages particularly the young children. A short story
narrates an incident in the life of one or more characters. These characters may be real or imaginary. Stories are
told both for entertainment and for developing moral values. There are several types of stories each with its
peculiarities. Fairy tales, fables, bedtime stories, detective stories, thriller stories, historical stories, parables, are
all types of stories with different themes, settings, styles, characters, style of narration, moral etc. However, there
are certain elements which are common to all. All stories have a basic layout with a beginning, middle and an end.
                                              Layout of a Story




                      Beginning                       Middle                             End




The Beginning: The beginning is the most important part of the story writing. It introduces all the
major characters around which the plot of the story is wound. It sets up the time, background and action of the
story. It should be so well written that it catches the reader’s attraction. It highlights the people, places and
situations in a creative way with a vivid description. It is the part where the writer can take his ﬂights of
imagination wherever he wishes keeping the plot in mind.
The Middle: The middle of the story develops the action. It introduces an element of conﬂict by creating
situations where the characters of the story struggle to get a solution to their problem. It makes the readers curious
to know what would happen next. All the major events and happenings of the plot happen in this part. The
developments that take place in this part pave the way for the climax and the end of the story.
The End: The end marks the climax of the story and brings it to a close in an unexpected and interesting
way. The end of the story may be either happy or tragic. Whatever be the type of story, it always conveys a
message.

                                      Constituents of a Story

                                                           Plot



                                                                         Time and
                                     Dialogues
                                                                          Setting
                                                      Constituents
                                                       of a Story



                                           Actions &
                                          Happenings              Characters



                                                           63
      Important Points to Consider for Writing a Short Story
1. Choose a theme. Think of the characters and major actions.
2. Arrange the actions and events in a logical sequence and develop an outline.
3. Think of a suitable title.
4. Set the story in a certain time and space.
5. Write the beginning in an interesting and dramatic way by giving a vivid description of people, places and
objects depending on the requirement of the story. Make sure that the description is not very long.
6. Use a variety of verbs in explaining the actions and happenings. Remember, a story is usually written in Past
Tense, but the dialogues of the story may be in Present or Future Tense too. Use a variety of expressions and
interjections to make the characters alive.
7. Use appropriate sequence markers (ﬁrstly, then, later on, soon, eventually etc.) and cohesive devices (but, so,
however, thus, gradually etc.) to connect the actions.
8. Make use of appropriate adjectives and adverbs to create an everlasting effect about the characters and
actions.
9. Use similes, metaphors, hyperboles and other ﬁgures of speech to beautify your language and narrate the
story in a realistic way.
10. Make the end of the story interesting, dramatic and appropriate.
11. End your story with a moral or social message.
                                Ways of Developing a Story

1. Taking Hints from Visuals: A story may be developed taking hints from the visuals provided. The story must
be related to the visuals provided.
Example:




                                                       64
2. Developing Story from the Beginning: In this method, only the beginning of the story is provided. The story
   developer is free to use his ﬂight of imagination to develop a story and give it a suitable title.
  Example: Once upon a time, there were two ants, George and John. George always worked hard whereas John
  was a shirker. One day..........................................................
3. Developing a Story from the Outlines: A story may be developed from the given outlines which provide a
clue about the plot of the story
Example:
     A king------had a lot of gold------proud of gold------still greedy for more gold------hungry old man-----
     orders servant to feed the old man------old man angel------grants golden touch------touches daughter--
     ----daughter turns into gold statue------repents------requests angel to reverse the golden touch------
     learnt a lesson------gave away all his wealth.

                                           The Midas Touch
Many centuries ago, there lived a king named Midas in Greece. The king had a beautiful kingdom. He owned
so much gold that he could buy an entire city. His throne, his bed, his utensils were all made of gold. He loved his
gold dearly and was proud of it. He had innumerable bricks and coins of gold which he kept safe in a dungeon.
The king used to visit his dungeon everyday and count the bricks and coins of gold. The queen greatly disliked the
king's obsession with gold. One day the queen said, “O king, don't give so much value to gold all the time.
Gold is not everything.” The king replied, “I can buy anything with gold. Now don't argue with me anymore.”
The king's love for gold kept increasing each passing day. He loved it so much that he named his beloved daughter
Marigold. Marigold was the dearest to her father. One day she called out to her father and said, “Father, come
and see how beautiful these ﬂowers are. What a beautiful day it is! Look how the dewdrops shine on the grass!
“It is still not shinier than my gold”, boasted the king. “You won't understand dear. You go and play alone.” The
little Marigold wondered how gold could be more beautiful than ﬂowers.
As time passed by, King Midas started spending more and more time in the dungeon alone counting the gold
bricks and coins over and over again. A few days later, the royal guards brought a strange, old man into the court
of the king. The man was dressed in simple clothes. He wore no sandals on his feet. “Who is this man?” asked
the King. “Your highness! I found him wandering in the streets. He says that he has lost his way and hasn't eaten
anything for three days”, said one of the guards. The king ordered his servants to make provisions for the old
man's food and stay. Suddenly, the old man changed into an angel. He told King Midas that he was impressed
with his greatness and wanted to grant him a wish.
The king, greedy for gold, asked the angel to give him more and more gold. The angel told that he could not give
him gold, but he could give him a golden touch. The angel touched the king's hands and spelled a magic. He asked
the king to touch a wooden stick. As soon as the king touched the wooden stick, it changed into gold. The king
became mad with happiness to get the golden touch. He started touching things and changing everything into
gold. A little later, he felt thirsty and ordered his servants to bring him a glass of water. As soon as the king held
the glass of water, it changed into solid gold. The king tried to eat an orange and quench his thirst, the orange too
changed into gold. The king was dumbfounded. He did not know what to do. Before he could understand
anything, his little daughter ran into the court and jumped up into the king's arms. No sooner did the king catch
hold of her daughter than she turned into a golden statue. The king started shouting and crying to see his daughter
become a lifeless statue. He fell into the angel's feet and said, “I am extremely sorry for being so greedy. Please
take your golden touch back and change and give me my daughter back.” The angel took the golden touch back
and wound a magic wand bringing Marigold to life again. King Midas had learnt his lesson that gold could not
buy everything. He gave away all his gold to the poor.
Moral: Never be greedy.
                                                          65
1. Look at the ﬂow chart given in the box below. Taking hints from the ﬂow chart develop a story. Give your
story a suitable title and write the moral of the story.
      A fox falls in a wall----------not much water----no way to get out-----------a goat leans over the well-----
      ----------asks what the fox is doing------------fox says terrible draught coming----------this well will not
      dry---------he tells the goat that his seat is reserved-----------goat jumps into the well--------------fox
      climbs on the back of the goat and jumps out of the well----------think before you act




                                                        66
2. Look at the ﬂow chart given in the box below. Taking hints from the ﬂow chart develop a story. Give your
story a suitable title and write the moral of the story.
      Rohan and Sumit------------ friends------------- crossing jungle------------see a bear-------bears don’t
      climb up trees-------Rohan climbed up--------------Sumit afraid--------lies quietly-------holds breath as
      if dead-------bear comes--------goes near Sumit, sniffs ------------goes away------Rohan climbs down--
      ------Sumit silent--------Rohan asks what bear said-----Rohan said don’t trust fake friends.........




                                                       67
3. Look at the ﬂow chart given in the box below. Taking hints from the ﬂow chart develop a story. Give your
story a suitable title and write the moral of the story.
      Varun ----14 year old boy----bright and hardworking---- wants to become doctor---------meets an
      accident------loses one hand------------depressed-------family supports him-------determined to pursue
      his dream---------works hard to achieve his goal--------hard work pays back-------becomes a
      celebrated surgeon---------proves----where there is a will there is a way




                                                     68
4. Given below is the beginning of a story. Use the beginning to develop a story and name it as ‘The Fox and
the Crow’. Also write the moral of the story.
One day, a fox was wandering in a garden. He saw a crow swoop down and pick up a piece of cheese in its beak.
Flapping its wings, the crow, ﬂew onto a high branch of a tree and settled there to relish the piece of cheese. ..........




                                                           69
5. Given below is the beginning of a story. Use the beginning to develop a story and give it a suitable title.
Also write the moral of the story.
Once upon a time, there were two farmers. They were great friends. Ram lived in a village while Sham lived in a
town. One day Ram gave his plough to Sham to mend it. But the dishonest friend Sham sold it and kept the money
with him




                                                      70
