 Chapter-5                                     E-mail
We are living in a globalized world where awe-inspiring advancements in communication and information
technology have made it extremely easy to convey messages to or share information with the people sitting in any
part of the world within no time. People use phone calls, video-chat, text messages, e-mail and fax to share
information.
What is an E-mail: An e-mail, the short form of electronic mail, is the electronic form of written
correspondence or communication. It is the digital version of letter and can be sent instantly with the help of an
internet connection. Unlike a letter, it is the soft copy of a letter and can be sent to multiple receivers
simultaneously. It is not only the quickest method of conveying messages or sharing information, but also
environment friendly as it saves paper and envelop. It is also cost effective as it does not require postal charges.
One can share text, images and other graphics using an e-mail. One can attach multiple ﬁles with a single e-mail.
The best thing about e-mail is that one can keep a record of one’s received and sent e-mails safe in one’s account,
and delete the ones which are not required any more. Most organizations, either government or private, prefer
using an e-mail instead of paper letters.
One must create an online e-mail account in order to be able to receive and send an e-mail. In the absence of an
e-mail account, one can use someone else’s account.
As e-mail is the electronic form of letter, it may be formal as well as informal depending on the person to whom
one sends it. The language, style and tone of the e-mail depend on whether it is formal or informal just as in the
case of a letter.
                                 Constituents of an E-mail
   1. From: The e-mail address of the sender is to be written in this box.
   2. To: The e-mail address of the receiver is to be written in this box.
   3. Cc: Cc means Carbon Copy. In this box, we write the e-mail addresses of the other people who are sent a
      copy of the e-mail along with the main receiver.
   4. Bcc: Bcc means Blind Carbon Copy. In this box, we write the e-mail addresses of the other people who are
      sent a copy of the e-mail along with the main receiver, but these e-mail addresses are kept hidden from the
      main receiver or from one another.
   5. Subject: In this box the purpose of writing the e-mail is written. The Subject should be clearly stated
      and brief.
   6. Date: Study carefully the formats of date given below.
                          th
          · D/M/Y: 24 November, 20XX or 24 November, 20XX
          · M/D/Y: November 24, 20XX
                                      Layout of an E-mail
               From:
               To:
               Cc:
               Bcc:
               Subject:
               Date:

                Salutation

                Message/Content

                Subscription


                                                        53
                      Points to remember while writing an e-mail
1. Write correct e-mail address of the sender as well as the receiver. Remember that the e-mail addresses must
    be written in small letters without any space between letters, words or symbols.
2. The subject of the e-mail should be clearly stated and relevant to the message or information conveyed.
3. The salutation should be appropriate according to formal or informal e-mail.
    Formal e-mail: Dear sir/Madam or Dear Sirs/ Dear Mr./Miss/Mrs. ...............................
    Informal e-mail:Dear, ............................./Dear (Mom/Dad/Brother/Sister)
4. Write the message as brieﬂy as possible without missing important information. Use short sentences and
    simple vocabulary to avoid any mis-communication. Use small paragraphs if required.
5. Organize the message to be conveyed in appropriate sequence in terms of priority of information.
6. Use grammatically correct sentences; avoid using slangs, abbreviations or contractions.
7. Ensure that the ﬁles attached are not infected with virus.
8. End your e-mail with a complimentary close such as ‘Bye, take care’ ‘With love’, Best wishes’ ‘Best
    regards’ ‘Regards’ etc.
9. Write suitable subscription such as ‘Yours obediently/ truly/ faithfully/ sincerely’ depending on the type of
    e-mail: formal or informal.
10. Write your name, designation, address, contact number at the bottom in case of formal e-mail. Write your
    name in case of informal e-mail.

                                           E-mail Sample
Write an e-mail to your friend, congratulating him/her on his/her grand success in the examination.
From:          Nehamehta6121@gmail.com
To:            ankitasharma@yahoo.com
Cc:
Bcc:
Subject:       Congratulations
Date:          July 26, 20XX

 Dear Ankita

 My joys knew no bounds when I read your name in the newspaper on top of the list of meritorious
 students. I am extremely happy that you have got the ﬁrst rank in your state board examination.
 Congratulations to you on this grand success! Convey my heartiest congratulations to your parents and
 grandparents. They all must be proud of you. I am really proud to have a friend like you.

 This is the result of all the hard work you have been putting in for many months. Finally, your hard
 work has borne fruit. This demands a great celebration. When are you giving me a treat? You have
 brought laurels to your parents and teachers. My parents are also very happy to hear of your grand
 success. They send their congratulations to you and your parents.

 I am sure you will continue to work hard in the same way in all your future endeavours. My best wishes
 are always with you. Convey my best regards to your parents and grandparents.

 With lots of love and best wishes
 Yours sincerely
 Ankita

                                                     54
1. Write an e-mail to your uncle thanking him for sending you a Play Station as your birthday gift. You may
   use the following hints.
        Hints: Thank your uncle, explain how desperately you wanted it, brand, features, how you use it,
        promise to keep safe




                                                    55
2. Write an e-mail to your friend expressing your inability to attend his birthday party. You may use the
   following hints.
        Hints: Wish, reason for not attending, express regret for not attending, mention what you had
        planned, gift, promise to meet soon in future




                                                   56
3. You were out to an island for spending your winter vacation. Due to some reasons your ﬂight has been
cancelled. You are unable to rejoin the school on 1st January. Send an e-mail to your Principal requesting
him/her to sanction you leave for three days.
       Hints: Name of island, ﬂight no, day and date of cancelled ﬂight, reason, trying to get tickets, request for
       leave




                                                       57
4. Write an e-mail to your friend who has met with an accident enquiring after his health. You may use the
   following hints.
       Hints: Your reaction, ask how it happened, advise to take rest, eat healthy diet, proper treatment,
       precautions, wish for speedy recovery




                                                    58
5. You have recently been appointed monitor of the class. Write an e-mail to your mother giving her a
detailed account of your new experience, your rights and responsibilities as the Monitor. You may use the
following hints.

       Hints: Qualities due to which you were appointed, rights and responsibilities, discipline, cooperation
       from other students, your popularity as monitor, change in your personality




                                                      59
